2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition

Face Veriﬁcation: Strategies for Employing Deep Models
Ricardo Barbosa Kloss, Artur Jordão, William Robson Schwartz
Smart Surveillance Interest Group, Department of Computer Science
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
rbk@dcc.ufmg.br, arturjordao@dcc.ufmg.br, william@dcc.ufmg.br
datasets or tasks different than the ones they were originally
trained. This is done through transfer learning, which is
the act of adapting a model learned on one data domain to
another, e.g., different task or different labels. In our case,
we perform transfer learning for different labels, same task.
The transfer learning usually consists of replacing some
of the ﬁnal layers of a learned model and reconditioning
the weights to new data, a process called ﬁne-tunning.
The disadvantage of this process is that it requires robust
hardware to perform the learning process and although the
need of large datasets is diminished, it is still present.
Motivated by these limitations, we explore transfer learning
approaches that would require little to no ﬁne-tuning. We
hypothesize that features associated with each layer of a
sequential model tend to be more speciﬁc to the learned
environment as its depth increases, since a node of a neural
network is being built by correlating patterns of patterns.
This way, we believe that the penultimate layer might not be
ideal to extract features if the new data are characteristically
different than the data used to learn the model.
To evaluate our hypothesis, we extract features from
different layers and test them with distance metrics to be
employed for face veriﬁcation, a largely explored research
topic [5], [9]. The goal of face veriﬁcation is to determine
whether two face images belong to the same individual.
Early works on face veriﬁcation employed low-level feature extractors to obtain feature representations for face
images [10]–[14]. Nowadays, it is more common to learn
features instead of engineering them [15], [16]. Ouamane et.
al. [14] achieved great results in face veriﬁcation by using an
adaptation of Discriminant Analysis for the weakly labeled
case of same/not-same pairs coupled with exponential kernel
Regarding Deep learning methods, Sun et al. [15] proposed
one of the ﬁrst deep architecture for the task, it relied on
an ensemble of crop specialized convolutional networks.
In their work a pair of face images is fed as input to
an ensemble of networks. Hu et al. [16] also used deep
learning models on face recognition. They employed a
siamese network with shared weights to learn a MDML.
That is, their network model works as a space transformation
where the transformed features are more discriminable.
In contrast to the aforementioned works, we evaluate wellknown handcrafted measures such as χ2 , L1 and L2 to compare two faces. Moreover, we also use convolutions to learn

Abstract—Features extracted with deep learning have now
achieved state-of-the-art results in many tasks. However, to
reuse a learned deep model, transfer learning with ﬁne-tuning
needs to be employed, which requires to re-train the whole
model or part of it to extract useful features in the new
domain. This step is burdensome and requires heavy computing
power. Therefore, this work investigates alternatives in transferlearning that do not involve performing ﬁne-tuning for a model
with the new domain. Namely, we explore the correlation of
depth and scale in deep models, and look for the layer/scale
that yields the best results for the new domain, we also
explore metrics for the veriﬁcation task, using locally connected
convolutions to learn distance metrics. Our experiments use a
model pre-trained in face identiﬁcation and adapt it to the
face veriﬁcation task with different data, but still on the face
domain. We achieve 96.65% mean accuracy on the Labeled
Faces in the Wild dataset and 93.12% mean accuracy on the
Youtube Faces dataset comparable to the state-of-the-art.
Keywords-Transfer Learning, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks,
Face Veriﬁcation, Metric Learning

I. I NTRODUCTION
Images are two dimensional representation of a scene in
the world, and are a means for us to record this scene and
extract information, such as detect objects, which could be
associated with a tool used by a perpetrator of a crime,
or recognize a face by verifying that it matches with a
valid identity, allowing us to open an automated door, for
instance. Machine learning and computer vision are usually
employed to tackle these tasks, where neural networks with
deep architectures have gained much popularity and have
broken many state-of-the-art records.
Since the AlexNet model [1] won the ImageNet 2012
challenge [2], deep learning models [3] have been popularized and made breakthroughs in many areas, such as winning
matches of a Go, a difﬁcult game, against world champions [4] and achieving results comparable to humans in
face veriﬁcation [5]. Many architectures have been explored
for image tasks since the work of Krizhevsky et al. [1],
from Inception [6], which leaves the choice of window size
to pick in a convolution layer to the model, to Densely
Connected [7] and Resnet [8], which attempts to tackle
the vanishing gradient problem by using early layer in the
computation of latter ones.
Many models which have achieved great results on ImageNet competitions have also been successfully used in

978-1-5386-2335-0/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/FG.2018.00045

258

)DFH$

9**
'HHSPRGHO

Table I
H ANDCRAFTED DISTANCE METRICS USED . x AND y ARE TWO VECTORS
AND ALL OPERATIONS APPLIED ARE ELEMENT- WISE , THAT IS THEY
ALSO RETURN A VECTOR .

)DFH%

3RRO

3RRO

9**
'HHSPRGHO

/D\HUSLFNLQJDQG
IHDWXUHH[WUDFWLRQ
)HDWXUHV$

Figure 1.

Formula

χ2
L1
Sign
L2

(x−y)2
x+y

|x − y|
x×y
(x − y)2

vector is presented to a classiﬁer, which in our experiments
we used the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [21].
To search for complementary information, we conducted
experiments with different metrics: i) the χ2 , deﬁned by
the square of differences over the sum, suited for histogram
comparison and used in the work of Taigman et al. [5]
to compare different feature vectors extracted from deep
models; ii) the square of differences (L2 ), an alternative
to taking the absolute value to make it indifferent to the
order of the variables, which also accentuates very small
and very large values, this last characteristic could convey
complementary information to that of the simple absolute
value of differences. An overview of the metrics is listed in
Table I.
We use a VGG16 architecture [22] learned on the face
identiﬁcation domain to extract features from the LFW and
YTF datasets. This architecture consists of 16 convolutional
and fully connected ones layers. In general, the features are
extracted from the penultimate fully connected layer [5].
However, we experiment with different layers (pool5, the
last convolutional layer, fc6, the ﬁrst fully connected layer
and fc7, the penultimate layer), hypothesizing that there is an
inverse correlation between generalization and layer depth.
Our hypothesis comes from two clues. The ﬁrst is the fact
that as max-pooling occurs it has the effect of enlarging the
receptive ﬁeld and then capture larger and more complex
patterns, usually associated with a higher semantic level.
The second is that a node of a neural network layer can
be interpreted as a type of correlation to detect patterns.
Therefore, with stacked layers, one layer output is in a
pattern domain and the next layer will be in a pattern of
patterns domain, which we believe increases complexity of
the patterns and decreases generalization. The feature vector
of a face image extracted by a deep model has each of its
variable as the result of a correlation of signals after applying
a nonlinear activation. The variable, then, represents the
conﬁdence that a given pattern was located by a neural
node. In the image space, a two dimensional signal, there
is spatial independence of patterns, i.e., an object such as
a ball, can be located at different positions, however, in the
feature space the variables have more spatial dependency
and it is reasonable that if a variable has large value on a
sample and low value on the other this is correlated with
them being different from one another.

)HDWXUHV%

0HWULFV
>_$%_$x%ORFDOO\FRQQHFWHG $% @

Name

6DPH"

Illustration of our approach for face veriﬁcation.

a weighted sum of the variables, i.e., the convolution would
be able to identify and give higher weights for variables
which are more discriminative. Our second hypothesis is
that the locally connected convolution [5] would be more
suitable for learning a weighted metric than the standard
convolution because the variables in the deep features have
a spatial independence that can be exploited by the locally
connected convolution.
In our experiments, we extract a feature vector of each
face with a VGG16 model, learned on the VGGFaces
dataset [17]. The learned models are trained using approximately 2.6 million images and, although, additional training
is usually employed, e.g., triplet loss embedding or top layer
ﬁne-tuning, we neither conduct additional learning nor use
additional data, but we still achieve very competitive results.
We perform an experimental evaluation using the labeled
faces in the wild dataset [18] and in the Youtube Faces
Database [19], which are popular datasets in the literature
having been used by many works such as [5], [17], [20].
Our results are comparable to those in the state-of-the-art
scenario, with 96.65% ± 0.34 mean accuracy and standard
error on the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset and
93.12% ± 0.39 mean accuracy and standard error on the
Youtube Faces (YTF) dataset. Moreover, our approach is
simple and require a small number of samples.
II. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
Our method, illustrated in Figure 1, can be roughly
described as follows. First, we carefully choose a layer from
a neural network extracting its output as feature vectors
for each face image. Then, the relationship between the
two feature vectors is captured according to some distance
metric, resulting in a new vector. The metrics employed are
listed in Table I, we call them handcrafted because they are
not learned through the data. Finally, the resulting feature

259

Considering that some variables might be more important
than others to discriminate a pair of samples, we experiment
to use a weighted sum of the variables where the weights
are learned from the data. This is done by means of a
(2 × 1) locally connected convolutional (LCC) ﬁlter. These
ﬁlters, different to standard convolutional ﬁlters, are not
spatially shared, and for each variable of the pair of samples
a different relationship in the form xi ∗ wi,a + yi ∗ wi,b is
learned, where xi is the i-th variable from the ﬁrst sample
in the pair and yi is the analogous for the second sample
in the pair. We can note that the weights can therefore be
learned to ignore a variable from either of the face of one
of the pairs, suppose wi,a = 0 or wi,b = 0, to ignore the
relationship altogether, wi,a = 0 and wi,b = 0, or to give it
large importance, wi,a >> 0 and wi,b >> 0.
With the traditional convolution, the weights of a feature
map are shared across different spatial positions. This implies that the weighting for one pair of variables is suitable
to all the others. By using more convolutional ﬁlters, more
weighting relationships are learned. This will generate an
output with size N × F , where N is the length of the
feature vectors and F is the number of convolutional ﬁlters.
In general, this process results in memory problems which
can be circumvented with a trick also used in the Inception
Module [6]. It consists of employing another convolution
with a (1×1) sized ﬁlter to compress the channels dimension
after performing the layer convolution, resulting in an output
of size N, the original length of the input vector.
One problem of simply applying the weighted difference
between variables is that the weighted sum of the convolutions would have different value depending on the order
they are executed, since a − b = b − a. Thus, to avoid
this, the difference is followed by an absolute value layer,
making the relationship indifferent to the order that a pair
is presented. However, by taking the absolute value the
information of the sign of the variables is lost. In the product
of variables, sign in Table I, the result of the operation will
be positive if the operands have the same sign or negative
if they have different signs. This apparent complementarity
was the motivation that led us to test the sign metric and
combine it with other metrics.

Table II
ACCURACY OBTAINED IN L ABELED FACES IN THE W ILD WHEN USING
THE FEATURE MAP OBTAINED FROM LAYER pool5 WITH DIFFERENT
METRICS . T HE + SIGN INDICATES CONCATENATION OF METRICS .
Metric
Name
LCC
L1
Sign
L1 + Sign
χ2
L1 + Sign + LCC

Mean
Accuracy
95.15
90.83
90.75
96.32
96.39
96.48

Conﬁdence
Interval90%
[94.51, 95.79]
[90.34, 91.32]
[89.92, 91.58]
[95.78, 96.85]
[95.70, 97.08]
[95.91, 97.05]

and the standard error of the mean. It consists of a 10-fold
cross validation protocol, where each fold has 600 samples
with balanced labels. The second is the Youtube Faces
Database (YTF) [19], a dataset that has gained popularity in
face recognition being used by [5] and [20]. The YTF setup
is similar to LFW, but instead of verifying pairs of images,
pairs of videos are used. It is also a 10-fold protocol, but
each fold has 500 label balanced samples. Its images are
usually of a smaller resolution than LFW.
Regarding implementation details, when comparing two
faces in the veriﬁcation task, this yields a similarity metric,
which is a numeric value. It is then necessary to choose
a threshold which is used to classify a pair of samples as
belonging to the same identity or not, given this similarity.
In our case, the similarity is constrained in the [0, 1] domain,
due to the output of a sigmoid neural node and we simply
choose the median of the domain as the threshold, i.e., 0.5.
B. Results and Discussion
Table II shows the performance of the different metrics.
According to the results, the χ2 is able to achieve good
results when employed alone. However, experimentally we
note that its combination with other metrics did not have
a positive effect. In comparison, the L1 and Sign metrics,
although showing a lower accuracy, when combined showed
an reasonable improvement, indicating that the information
of each metric is indeed, complementary to one another.
The Locally Connected (LCC) metric also obtained a good
result alone. Finally, the combination of L1 + Sign + LCC
yielded the best result of the metrics with 96.48% mean
accuracy. Other combinations were experimented, omitted
due to space limitations.
Regarding our hypothesis that previous layers can provide
better results, Tables III and IV reinforce that the complexity
and specialization of the model increases with depth, and
that is the reason we observe a worse result in the ﬁnal
layer fc7 on both datasets. For the LFW, we note that the
best result was with the pool5 layer and the result was
gradually degrading, this layer is probably the one with
most suitable patterns for the LFW and the successive layers
are too speciﬁc to the VGGFaces domain. This correlation
between depth and generalization/speciﬁcation is probably a

III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we explain the protocol of our experiments,
discuss the face veriﬁcation task, the models and considered
datasets. Then, we present and discuss our results.
A. Experimental Setup
We use the following two datasets in our face veriﬁcation
experiments, mainly for their ubiquity and ease of use.
The ﬁrst is the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) [18],
which is the de-facto academic test set for face veriﬁcation.
We follow the standard protocol for unrestricted, labeled
outside data and report the mean classiﬁcation accuracy,

260

Table V
S TATE - OF - THE - ART C OMPARISON (L ABELED FACES IN THE W ILD ).

Table III
ACCURACY OBTAINED WHEN USING DIFFERENT FEATURES (L ABELED
FACES IN THE WILD ). L1 + Sign METRIC USED .
Layer
Name
pool5
fc6
fc7

Mean
Accuracy
96.32
94.63
93.13

Conﬁdence
Interval90%
[95.78, 96.85]
[93.95, 95.32]
[91.74, 93.69]

Method
Name
FaceNet [20]
DeepFace [5]
Ours

Rank
1
2
3

ACCURACY OBTAINED WHEN USING DIFFERENT FEATURES (YOUTUBE
FACES ). L1 + Sign METRIC USED .
Mean
Accuracy
91.00
93.12
91.54

Conﬁdence
Interval90%
[89.55, 92.45]
[92.45, 93.79]
[90.67, 92.41]

Conﬁdence
Interval90%
[99.58, 99.68]
[96.90, 97.81]
[96.03, 97.27]

Table VI
S TATE - OF - THE - ART C OMPARISON (YOUTUBE FACES ).

Table IV

Layer
Name
pool5
fc6
fc7

Mean
Accuracy
99.63 ± 0.09
97.35 ± 0.25
96.65 ± 0.34

Method
Name
FaceNet [20]
DeepFace [5]
VGG [17]
Ours

Rank
3
1
2

Mean
Accuracy
95.12 ± 0.39
91.40 ± 1.1
91.6
93.12 ± 0.34

100%
- EER
91.4
92.8
93.22

Conﬁdence
Interval90%
[94.89, 95.35]
[90.76, 92.04]
[92.45, 93.79]

through this careful layer selection, outperformed the results
(without triplet-loss embedding), of the model originally
trained on the VGGFaces dataset, which we use to extract
deep features. That is, by picking a different layer of the
model trained on the VGGFaces we obtained better results.

characteristic of purely sequential models such as VGG16
and we believe this corroborates with the hypothesis of Huan
et al. [7] that connecting a layer to multiple successive layers
is also a form of regularization. We hypothesizes it as being
a distribution of complexity across layers of all depths.
Our best result in LFW is presented in Table V. It was
obtained by using the metric L1+Sign+LCC together with
the concatenation of two feature vectors, one obtained from
LBP [23] and the other from pool5 as deﬁned previously.
Our result was a mean accuracy of 96.65, and although
this number does not outperform the one from the work
of Taigman et al. [5], a unpaired T-Test [24] with 90%
Conﬁdence shows that the conﬁdence interval of the difference of these two means contains the zero, therefore,
they are not statistically different. To our advantage, our
results was obtained with a simpler approach, as we do
not use of their 3D alignment called frontalization and we
also use a model for deep features that was trained on a
smaller number of samples. Regarding Schroff et al. [20],
our result is statistically inferior, they employ a Triplet
Loss network that learns a projection in which same pairs
are closer regarding the second order minkowski distance
and not-same pairs are far apart. On the other hand, our
deep feature models use much fewer samples than them
and also do not require a careful selection of the triplet
to be presented to the model. Therefore, with much less
complexity and computation, careful selection of a layer
feature map and simple variable metrics, our approach was
statistically equivalent.
In the Youtube Faces, our best result achieved a mean
accuracy of 93.12%, as presented in Table VI. Our method
is statistically superior to that of Taigman et al. [5], even
though we use fewer samples and a simpler face alignment
technique. This is a valid example that careful consideration
of which layer to use in another dataset can be a valid
transfer learning technique.
In Table VI, in the third row, we see that our method,

IV. C ONCLUSIONS
We presented accurate results on the task of face veriﬁcation with a simple method of transfer learning, consisting of
a careful choice of which layer of a neural network to extract
feature maps. Our result outperformed Taigman et al. [5]
in one benchmark (YTF) and was statistically equivalent
in another (LFW). Their work was the ﬁrst work to have
human comparable results on this task, and they relied on a
3D alignment, frontalization. Our simpler model does no
frontalization and also uses fewer samples to learn deep
features. Finally, we believe that model ﬁne-tuning, although
able to yield improved results is not a hard requirement for
transfer learning. In addition, we have showed experimental
evidence that it is possible to adapt a model trained on one
dataset to another through simple layer selection and with
small additional computing cost.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Brazilian National
Research Council – CNPq (Grant 311053/2016-5), the Minas Gerais Research Foundation – FAPEMIG (Grants APQ00567-14, RED-00042-16 and PPM-00540-17) and the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel – CAPES (DeepEyes Project). The authors acknowledge
the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the
GeForce Titan X GPU used for this research.
R EFERENCES
[1] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton,
“Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105.

261

[13] Andrew Wagner, John Wright, Arvind Ganesh, Zihan Zhou,
Hossein Mobahi, and Yi Ma, “Toward a practical face
recognition system: Robust alignment and illumination by
sparse representation,” Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2012.

[2] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause,
Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg,
and Li Fei-Fei, “ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge,” International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV),
vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.

[14] Abdelmalik Ouamane, Messaoud Bengherabi, Abdenour Hadid, and Mohamed Cheriet, “Side-information based exponential discriminant analysis for face veriﬁcation in the wild,”
in Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG), 2015 11th
IEEE International Conference and Workshops on. IEEE,
2015, vol. 2, pp. 1–6.

[3] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton, “Deep
learning,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[4] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez,
Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc
Lanctot, et al., “Mastering the game of go with deep neural
networks and tree search,” Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp.
484–489, 2016.

[15] Yi Sun, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang, “Hybrid deep
learning for face veriﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2013, pp.
1489–1496.

[5] Yaniv Taigman, Ming Yang, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Lior
Wolf, “Deepface: Closing the gap to human-level performance in face veriﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2014, pp. 1701–1708.

[16] Junlin Hu, Jiwen Lu, and Yap-Peng Tan, “Discriminative
deep metric learning for face veriﬁcation in the wild,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2014, pp. 1875–1882.
[17] O. M. ”Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, and A.” Zisserman, “”deep
face recognition”,” in ”British Machine Vision Conference”,
”2015”.

[6] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet,
Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent
Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich, “Going deeper with
convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 1–9.

[18] Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Honglak Lee, and Erik
Learned-Miller, “Learning to align from scratch,” in NIPS,
2012.

[7] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens van der Maaten, and
Kilian Q. Weinberger, “Densely connected convolutional
networks,” in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.

[19] Lior Wolf, Tal Hassner, and Itay Maoz, “Face recognition in
unconstrained videos with matched background similarity,”
in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011
IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 529–534.

[8] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun,
“Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.

[20] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin,
“Facenet: A uniﬁed embedding for face recognition and
clustering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 815–
823.

[9] R. Chellappa, P. Sinha, and P.J. Phillips, “Face Recognition
by Computers and Humans,” Computer, vol. 43, no. 2, pp.
46–55, 2010.

[21] Simon S Haykin, Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation, Tsinghua University Press, 2001.

[10] W. Zhang, S. Shan, W. Gao, X. Chen, and H. Zhang, “Local
Gabor Binary Pattern Histogram Sequence (LGBPHS): A
Novel Non-Statistical Model for Face Representation and
Recognition,” in IEEE Intl. Conference on Computer Vision,
2005, pp. 786–791.

[22] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[23] Timo Ojala, Matti Pietikainen, and David Harwood, “Performance evaluation of texture measures with classiﬁcation
based on kullback discrimination of distributions,” in Pattern
Recognition, 1994. Vol. 1-Conference A: Computer Vision
&amp; Image Processing., Proceedings of the 12th IAPR
International Conference on. IEEE, 1994, vol. 1, pp. 582–
585.

[11] John Wright, Allen Y Yang, Arvind Ganesh, S Shankar
Sastry, and Yi Ma, “Robust face recognition via sparse representation,” Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 2009.
[12] L. Wolf, T. Hassner, and I. Maoz, “Face Recognition in
Unconstrained Videos with Matched Background Similarity,”
in IEEE Intl. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2011, pp. 529–534.

[24] Raj Jain, The art of computer systems performance analysis:
techniques for experimental design, measurement, simulation,
and modeling, John Wiley & Sons, 1990.

262

